Why am I not a Buddhist?
Um, for some of you the question might be,
uh, why was I ever a Buddhist? Or, why would
I now say that I'm an ex-Buddhist, as opposed
to saying that I never was a Buddhist.
Um, I was involved with Buddhist studies (Buddhist-related
research) for 12 years of my life, a big percentage
of my adult life.
And, uh, to start with a parable, I guess,
I remember hearing on the radio, in Canada,
many years ago, about 15 years ago, a complaint
from a Christian minister about the derision
and contempt he was regarded with in Canada,
just as he went grocery shopping and went
about his daily business.
At that time there were scandals in the newspapers
about both Catholic and Protestant priests
and ministers and so on, and I remember that
he specifically said that he couldn't smile
at or wave at a child without people looking
at him shrewishly or asking, "What's that
guy's problem?", or this kind of thing.
Now, y'know, that minister, from his perspective,
when he puts on a uniform, he expects to get
more reverence, more respect, than some stranger
you know nothing about. He thinks he's clothing
himself in something that raises his status,
and I would guess many medical doctors have
the same expectation when they put on a lab
coat with a name-tag, and many other professions
as well, even though we know, rationally,
that a medical doctor can be a terrible person,
obviously a priest can be a terrible person,
and so on. But it doesn't enter into the priest's
mind that when you live in a country where
the vast majority of people are not Christian
you're clothing yourself in the legacy of
genocide, slavery, racism within the church,
and, of course, recent sexual abuse scandals.
You're clothing yourself in something that's
odious and that's only justified by, y'know,
an appeal to supernatural things that fewer
and fewer people now believe in.
However, the other meditation that comes out
of that is the fact that many people who (when
they meet that priest) are apprehensive or
suspicious, who don't have a positive response
to seeing the man in uniform, many of those
people still have a positive idea of Christianity,
still have some kind of religious connection
to, uh, an abstract god or still pray or still
want to believe in something.
Y'know, with Buddhism, I had to recognize
at a certain point that when I met someone
who was a Buddhist monk, I didn't assume good
things about them anymore. On the contrary,
I'd had so much experience that, um, when
I met someone who was wearing the robes, instead
[I'd] have apprehensions and very negative
expectations, and [I] would wonder, y'know,
"What's his story?"
Once in a while you meet a monk and you find
out who they are and you find out there are
some thing you can respect about them, however,
when you know the state of Buddhist monasticism
in the 21st century you know that if you meet
a complete stranger on the street, dressed
in a nondescript way, you may expect the best,
you may expect the worst, you have no expectations
either way, compared to the rest of humanity;
but when you meet someone who is a Buddhist
monk, what they're clothed in (for me, as
someone who became an expert on Buddhism,
in 12 years) is actually very negative. So,
as soon as I could recognize that, y'know,
not only is it the case that I'm not a Buddhist,
but that I don't want to be a Buddhist, I
don't want to be called or referred to as
a Buddhist. Uh, you can look up an interview
I gave to a magazine in Hong Kong (a Buddhist
magazine) in which I do refer to myself as
a Buddhist, I'll provide the link at the bottom
of this youtube video; so I have called myself
a Buddhist in the past, and I can remember
other people trying to denounce me by claiming
that I was not a Buddhist, and I would be
able to turn around and say, "Look, this is
what I've accomplished in the past years,
this is what I've devoted my life to, what
grounds do you have for saying I'm not a Buddhist?"
Very often the people saying this [to me],
they themselves had no scholarly knowledge
of Buddhism, they had not done anything, they
had not accomplished anything in their lives,
that proved any kind of commitment to (or
interest in) the religion.
Now, [within] Buddhism, perhaps more than
some [other] religions, it is entirely possible
to be a Buddhist and not believe in anything
supernatural. It is true [that] I never believed
in magic, I never believed that when you die
you went to meet King Yama in hell --and it's
the same King Yama in the Pali canon that
you see in the modern cartoon Dragon Ball
Z. It's the same mythology; different artists
have interpreted it in different ways, of
course, over the centuries.
No, uh, in that sense, I never did [believe],
but what I believe in that was more compelling
to me was that my engagement with Buddhism
was part of me making a positive difference
in the world, and I'd like to think that's
what motivated someone to be a scholar of
Socrates or Thucydides, or any other ancient
philosopher, that may not be considered religious
today, or that may be a religious philosopher.
And what made Theravada Buddhism so dynamic
was the mix of humanitarian work and field
research that it offered me, that there was
the modern disaster of places like Cambodia
and Laos, the intersection of political and
philosophical concerns, ancient history and
modern history, and indeed ancient languages
and modern languages, all mixed up at the
same point.
But there's a very sad sequel to the first
image I used, that when I meet a Buddhist
monk I don't consider them a good person,
I don't have positive expectations, that I'm
apprehensive, knowing what I know, and many
other Buddhists, sadly, are the same way;
and that is that in 12 years, I met many of
the leading figures in the field face-to-face,
and there are many others whose work I've
read and who talked to me by e-mail, this
being the 21st century, and, um, there's not
a single scholar in the game that I respect.
Not even one. And, uh, the level of intellectual
dishonesty and fraud --outright fraud-- that
exists in the academic study of Buddhism,
that was something that continued to disappoint
me, no matter how low my expectations were.
So, uh, y'know, when I say now that I'm an
ex-Buddhist, that's because in the past, even
though I didn't believe in magic, I did commit
my life (I thought I would spend the rest
of my life) [to] working on Pali and its connection
to modern Southeast Asian languages (including
Lao, Cambodian, etc.) and I thought I would
dedicate my life partly to dragging some of
the most interesting philosophy out of those
ancient texts and making it available to the
public, and also being involved in (and I
was involved in) the humanitarian concerns
as those countries variously emerged from
post-war, post-communist disasters, and undergo
a period of cultural and economic transformation.
(Silence.)
The positive side of the story is that I did
accomplish, really, everything I wanted to
accomplish. I was able to live in those countries
for a number of years, I was able to work
on those languages, I was able to teach myself
Pali to a level where I could really read
philosophy in the original source, and I had
a diverse and very educational experience
during those years. A very very hard life
financially and materially, I coped with very
tough circumstances, but when people ask me
(and they do sometimes ask me), "Why don't
you go back to Cambodia now?", "Why don't
you continue your work in these places?",
one reason is that I've done just about everything
I set out to do. That's the positive reason.
And the negative reason is what I've already
mentioned, that there's really no further
I can go with it, because of the absence of
any colleagues that I respect, the absence
of any institutions I respect. And I get fan-mail
all the time, still today I get fan-mail (I
got more in the past when I was more active
on the internet), and normally the first question
people wanna ask is, "Wow, this is great,
give me your recommended reading list, whose
book should I read?" "What's the best place
to study?" "What are the best institutions?"
And, um, y'know, in terms of living authors
and so on, there's really nothing I can recommend,
and instead, y'know, when people write back
to me with enthusiasm about some book, I have
to say, "No, I'm sorry to warn you, but this
translator is intentionally misleading in
these ways, this author is misleading in these
ways," it's really reached a remarkably low
ebb in 2014.
So, y'know, that's the negative side of it.
I've been all over the world with this Buddhist
thing.
I spoke once with a monk who I have some respect
for, to give a positive example of a monk;
he was a guy who was dragged out of one country
after another as a refugee, and, uh, his temple
was burned down by muslims, he was attacked
and beaten by muslims, his followers were
too, he was a victim of anti-Buddhist muslim
violence, which is a huge issue that you can't
read about much in the mainstream press, but
that's the story of a thousand years that's
still ongoing today. And, um, I remember he
and I had a long conversation, he was very
honest with me (many monks are, because, as
a man with a shaved head, who can really read
Pali, and who knew the text, I had a kind
of intermediary status, half-way between monk
and layperson), a lot of them were very honest
with me… and, um, at the end of the conversation,
he sort of turned off the honesty it seemed
to me, and for a second just said, "Well,
you know, everything in Buddhism is getting
better and better now."
"It's flourishing here in the west, it's flourishing
in various countries in Asia…", and that
was such a striking contrast to the conversation
he and I had been having up until that moment,
[when] we were both talking about our experiences
in Southeast Asia and around the world. I
just said to him, I'm sorry, but I don't believe
you; I don't think even you believe that.
I think you know that Buddhism is collapsing
in China, Buddhism is collapsing in Tibet,
Buddhism is collapsing in Sri Lanka, Buddhism
is collapsing in Thailand, and so on.
And in the western world there's much less
legitimate scholarship of Buddhism going on
now than there was 100 years ago, virtually
zero, and there's certainly zero legitimate
religious or monastic Buddhism in the west.
There's a lot of fraud, a lot of scams, but,
um, nothing to hold up as a positive…